# Modular Tensor Categories 

In 1989 Moore and Seiberg showed that a (very large) class of Conformal Field Theories can be completely specified by some finite dimensional matrices that obey a couple of relations between them. These matrices were the F-symbols, R-Symbols, and the modular S-matrix, while the relations among them came to be known as the Pentagon and Hexagon equations. Using these one could "solve" (i.e. calculate all correlation functions) of a unique Conformal Field Theory. Yet, different sets of data would produce the same CFT, where it looked like we have made some "choice of basis" to define these matrices that our physics had no idea about. 

A Modular Tensor Category is the "basis-independent" way to express the data one needs to define a Conformal Field Theory. In these notes we will try to establish a quick overview of the language and calculation tools that Modular Tensor Categories offer us by following:

1. [TFT Construction of RCFT Correlators](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0204148)
2. [Tensor Categories](https://math.mit.edu/~etingof/egnobookfinal.pdf)
3. [Categories for the working mathematician](https://math.mit.edu/~etingof/egnobookfinal.pdf)

We will try to keep it at least a bit CFT flavored in order to highlight the applicability and calculation tools in the context of physics.

[TOC]



## Motivation

The physical data encoded in the Modular Tensor Category associated with a rational CFT can equally as well be described using the representation theory of what's called a *Chiral Algebra* of the CFT. In some sense a Chiral algebra is a (often) semi-simple Lie algebra generated by the modes of the conserved currents on the theory. In the conformal case, it must always contain the Virasoro algebra $\text{Vir}$, which is the one generated by the modes of currents associated to conformal transformations. 

Therefore the *bulk Hilbert space* $\mathbb{H}$ of the theory can be arranged in representations of the chiral algebra $\mathcal{B}$. To be more precise we often assume that there are two such algebras, the chiral $\mathcal{B}$ and the antichiral algebra $\overline{\mathcal{B}}$ so $\mathbb{H}$ is actually arranged in representations of $\mathcal{B} \otimes \overline{\mathcal{B}}$. Since representations of the tensor product can be written in terms of tensor product of representations, we will focus for a while on representations of $\mathcal{B}$.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\rho_V: \mathcal{B} \to \text{Aut\,}V$, $\rho_{w}: \mathcal{B}\to \text{Aut\,}W$ be two linear representations of $\mathcal{B}$. Then an **intertwiner** $u: V\to W$ is a linear map such that for any $X \in \mathcal{B}$ the diagram
$$
\xymatrix{
V \ar[r]^u\ar[d]_{\rho_V(X)}& W\ar[d]^{\rho_W(X)}\\
V \ar[r]^u& W
}
$$
commutes.

In other words it is a structure preserving map in the category of $\mathcal{B}$-modules. 

# The category of $\mathcal{B}$-modules

In fact, we can take the category of $\mathcal{B}$ modules with arrows the intertwiners. That category admits the structure of a direct sum between its elements which allows us to generate all the elements from the irreducible modules. 

## Working with nice tensors

To be more precise using the language already presented in these notes the category $\mathcal{C}$ of $\mathcal{B}$-modules is a **semisimple Abelian strict tensor category with $\mathbb{C}$ as its ring**. 

These are explained in other notes, but here is a brief review of the terms. 

**<u>Definition:</u>** A category $\mathcal{C}$ is **Abelian** if 

1. Every $\text{Hom}$-set is an Abelian Group where the composition of arrows respects the group operation.

2. There exists a **zero object** $0\in \mathcal{C}$ such that $\text{Hom}(0,0) = 0 = \text{Id}_0$ the identity of the group.

3. (**Existence of Direct Sums**) For any objects $X,Y \in \mathcal{C}$ there exists an object $X\oplus Y \in \mathcal{C}$ unique up to isomorphism, and arrows $\pi_X:X\oplus Y \to X$, $\pi_Y:X\oplus Y \to Y$, $\iota_X:X\to X\oplus Y$, $\iota_Y:Y\to X\oplus Y$ such that
   $$
   \begin{align*}
   \pi_{X} \circ \iota_X = \text{Id}_X && \pi_{Y} \circ \iota_Y = \text{Id}_Y && \iota_X \circ \pi_X + \iota_Y \circ \pi_Y = 1_{X\oplus Y}
   \end{align*}
   $$

4. For any arrow $f: X\to Y$ there exists a sequence
   $$
   \xymatrix{
   & & I \ar[dr]^j & \\
   K \ar[r]^k & X \ar[ur]^i \ar[rr]^f &  & Y \ar[r]^c & C, 
   }
   $$
   such that $j\circ i = f$, $\text{ker\,}f = (K,k)$, $\text{coker\,}f = (C,c)$, $\text{ker\,}c=(I,j)$ and $\text{coker\,}k = (I,i)$. This sequence is called the **canonical decomposition of** $f$ and $I$ is called the **image** of $f$.



Remember that the definition of the **kernel** for an arrow $f:X\to Y$ is the pair $(K,k)$, where $K \in \mathcal{C}$ and $k:K\to X$ such that $f\circ k = 0 \in \text{Hom}(K,Y)$, reversing the arrow's orientation we have the definition is for the cokernel. 

Schematically, an abelian category is one where we can talk about direct sums, where the set of structure preserving maps are nicely behaving in some way, and we can talk about images of objects in the way that we are used to form vector spaces. To continue we need tensor products! We will incorporate the structure of [monoidal categories](../Categories/Monoidal_Categories.md) inside tensor categories to reduce the number of definitions.

**<u>Definition:</u>** A **tensor category** $\mathcal{C}$ over a rink $k$ is an Abelian category such in which each $\text{Hom}$ space is a $k$-vector space and there exists a functor $\otimes: \mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{C}\to \mathcal{C}$ called the **tensor product** with a natural isomorphism $\alpha : (\cdot \otimes \cdot) \otimes \cdot \to^\ast \cdot \otimes (\cdot \otimes \cdot)$ called the **associator map**, a **unit object** $1\in \mathcal{C}$, and natural isomorphisms of the form $\lambda:1\otimes \cdot \to \cdot$  and $\rho: \cdot \otimes 1\to \cdot$  known as the **left and right unitors** such that

1. **Triangle Identity**: The following diagram commutes for all $X,Y \in \mathcal{C}$
   $$
   \xymatrix{
   & X\otimes Y  &\\
   (X\otimes 1) \otimes Y \ar[ur]^{\rho_X \otimes \text{Id}_Y} \ar[rr]^{\alpha_{X,1,Y}}& & X\otimes (1 \otimes Y) \ar[ul]_{\text{Id}_{X}\otimes \lambda_Y}
   }
   $$
   
2. **Pentagon Identity**: The following diagram commutes for all $X,Y,Z,W \in \mathcal{C}$.
   $$
   \xymatrix{
   & ((W\otimes X)\otimes Y) \otimes Z\ar[dl]_{\alpha_{W,X,Y}\otimes \text{Id}_Z}\ar[dr]^{\alpha_{W\otimes X,Y,Z}} &\\
   (W\otimes (X\otimes Y)) \otimes Z\ar[d]^{\alpha_{W,X\otimes Y, Z}} & & (W\otimes X)\otimes (Y \otimes Z)\ar[d]_{\alpha_{W,X,Y\otimes Z}}\\
   W\otimes ((X\otimes Y) \otimes Z)\ar[rr]^{\text{Id}_W \otimes \alpha_{X,Y,Z}} & & W\otimes (X\otimes (Y \otimes Z))
   }
   $$

3. **Bilinearity**: The functor $\otimes$ is $k$-bilinear on morphisms, i.e. $(f+g)\otimes (h+k) = f\otimes h + f\otimes k + g\otimes h + g\otimes k$, and $0\otimes f = f\otimes 0 = 0\otimes 0$.

4. **Unity**: $\text{Hom}(1,1) \eqqcolon\text{End}(1) \cong k$.

These are all the niceness properties of the tensor product we require. In essence these are the axioms we want for a *nicely behaving* tensor product. But now if ever in doubt we can go back to these and prove stuff to enhance our intuition. 

We have a couple more qualifiers left. The first one is strictness. The idea is that $1\otimes X = X = X\otimes 1$ this is formalized like this.

**<u>Definition:</u>** A tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ is **strict** if for any object $X \in \mathcal{C}$ the left and right unitors are identity, i.e. $\lambda_X = \rho_X = \text{Id}_{X}$. It is also called **finite** if each $\text{Hom}$-space is a finite dimensional $k$-module.

Another adjective that we have conveniently left unaddressed is semisimplicity. This is a niceness condition that restricts pathological cases and unlocks many nice interpretations.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be an abelian category and $X \in \mathcal{C}$ be a nonzero object, then $X$ is **simple** iff $0$ and $X$ are its only proper subobjects. A finite sum of simple objects is called **semisimple**. If all the objects in $\mathcal{C}$ are semisimple then it is a **semisimple Category**.

**<u>Lemma:</u>** In a finite tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ over an algebraically closed field $k$ an object $X$ is simple iff $\text{End}(X) \cong k \text{Id}_X$.

***Proof:*** Let $f \in \text{End}(X)$, since $X$ is simple its kernel $\text{ker\,}f = (K,k)$ is such that $K \in \{0,X\} $. If $K = X$ then $f = 0$. Similarly, because $X$ is simple, $\text{Im\,}f = I$ is such that $I \in \{0,X\}$.  We know that $I=0 \iff f = 0$. Then if $I=X$ then $K=0$ which implies that $f$ is an isomorphism. Therefore, every element in $\text{End}(X)$ must be invertible except $0$. The only finite dimensional $k$-module that is every element invertible is $k$ up to isomorphism. Therefore $\text{End}(X)= k \text{Id}_X$.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
This is a powerful lemma, that will be at the heart of building our computational tools for topological defect calculations. 

**<u>Lemma:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a semisimple category. Then there exists a family of simple objects $\mathcal{U}$ such that for any $V,W \in \mathcal{C}$ and any morphism $f:\text{Hom}(V,W)$ there exists $k\in \mathbb{N}$ such that
$$
f = \sum_{r=1}^kg_{r} \circ h_{r}
$$
where $h_r \in \text{Hom}(V,U_r)$, $g_{r} \in \text{Hom}(U_r,W)$ where $U_r \in \mathcal{U}$, such a family is called **dominant**.

**<u>Corollary:</u>** For any two objects $X,Y$ of a semisimple category $\mathcal{C}$
$$
\text{dim\,} \text{Hom}(V,W) = \text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(W,V).
$$
One more thing that we want to talk about is *duality*. Categorically the dual of a statement is the statement made by reversing all arrows. This is profoundly unhelpful though, so let's see it in the context of tensor categories.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a strict tensor category and take any object $X \in \mathcal{C}$. Then $X^\ast \in \mathcal{C}$ is a **left dual** of $X$ if there exist arrows $\text{ev}_X : X^\ast \otimes X \to 1$ and $\text{coev}_X : 1 \to X \otimes X^\ast$ known as the **evaluation** and **coevaluation** maps such that
$$
\xymatrix@C=5pc{
X\ar[r]\ar[r]^<>{\text{coev}_X\,\otimes\, \text{Id}_X} & (X\otimes X^\ast) \otimes X\ar[r]^{\alpha_{X,X^\ast,X}} & X \otimes (X^\ast \otimes X)\ar[r]^<>{\text{Id}_X\, \otimes\, \text{ev}_X} & X\\
X^\ast \ar[r]^<>{\text{Id}_{X^\ast}\, \otimes\, \text{coev}_X} & X^\ast \otimes (X \otimes X^\ast)\ar[r]^{\alpha_{X^\ast,X,X^\ast}^{-1}} & (X^\ast \otimes X) \otimes X ^\ast \ar[r]^<>{\text{ev}_X\, \otimes\, \text{Id}_{X^\ast}} & X^\ast
}
$$
Similarly, an object $^\ast X \in \mathcal{C}$  is a **right dual** if there exist evaluation and coevaluation maps $\text{ev}'_X: X\otimes {^\ast X} \to 1$, $\text{coev}'_X: 1 \to {^\ast X} \otimes X$ such that
$$
\xymatrix@C=5pc{
X\ar[r]\ar[r]^<>{\text{Id}_X\,\otimes\,\text{coev}'_X } & X\otimes ({^\ast X} \otimes X) \ar[r]^{\alpha_{X,^\ast X,X}^{-1}} & (X \otimes {^\ast X}) \otimes X\ar[r]^<>{\text{ev}_X'\, \otimes\,\text{Id}_X } & X\\
^\ast X \ar[r]^<>{\text{coev}_X'\, \otimes\, \text{Id}_{^\ast X}} & ({^\ast X} \otimes X) \otimes {^\ast X}\ar[r]^{\alpha_{^\ast X,X,^\ast X}} & ^\ast X \otimes (X \otimes {^\ast X}) \ar[r]^<>{ \text{Id}_{^\ast X}\, \otimes\,\text{ev}_X'} & ^\ast X
}
$$
**<u>Note:</u>** X is a right dual of $X^\ast$ and so on. As a result we have that $^\ast(X^\ast) = X = ({^\ast X})^\ast$. In a non-strict category these are replaced by isomorphisms. Also the evaluation map is in $\text{Hom}(1,X\otimes X^\ast)$ and so on.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** If a strict tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ has a left (right) dual, then it is unique.

We can extend duality in morphisms like so.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $X,Y \in \mathcal{C}$ have left duals $X^\ast, Y^\ast$ and consider any $f\in \text{Hom}(X,Y)$. Then its **left dual** $f^\ast \in \text{Hom}(Y^\ast,X^\ast)$ is defined by
$$
f^\ast \coloneqq  (\text{ev}_Y \otimes \text{Id}_{X^\ast}) \circ (\text{Id}_{Y^\ast} \otimes f) \circ \alpha_{Y^\ast,X,X^\ast}^{-1}\circ (\text{Id}_{Y^\ast} \otimes \text{coev}_X)
$$
similarly one can define a right dual.

Ok these are starting to get way too out of hand, especially since we already have intuition for the duals. So let's try to set some ground rules.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** Let $X,Y,Z \in \mathcal{C}$ have left and right duals and consider arrows $g:X\to Y, f:Y\to Z$. Then the following properties hold

1. $(f\circ g)^\ast = g^\ast \circ f^\ast$ and $^\ast(f\circ g) = {^\ast g}\circ {^\ast f} $.
2. $(X\otimes Y)^\ast = Y^\ast \otimes X^\ast$ and $^\ast(X\otimes Y) = {^\ast Y} \otimes{^\ast X}$.
3. $\text{Hom}(X\otimes Y,Z) \cong \text{Hom}(X,Z\otimes Y^\ast)$ and $\text{Hom}(X^\ast \otimes Y,Z) \cong \text{Hom}(Y,X\otimes Z)$
4. $\text{Hom}(X\otimes {^\ast Y},Z) \cong \text{Hom}(X,Z\otimes Y)$ and $\text{Hom}(X \otimes Y,Z) \cong \text{Hom}(Y,{^\ast X}\otimes Z)$

This is how we think of duality in physics in terms of evaluation maps that we define via an inner product.

## Braiding

Though nicely behaving tensors do not fully encapsulate the Moore-Seiberg data. There are more things that a healthy CFT needs. Part of this data is in braiding. The physical motivation comes from studying Anyons in 2D crystals, but its beyond the scope of this. Here is how to categorify it.

**<u>Definition:</u>** A a strict tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ is called **braided** if there exists a natural isomorphism $r: \cdot \otimes \cdot \to^\ast \cdot \otimes \cdot$ with components for any $X,Y\in \mathcal{C}$, $r_{X,Y} : X\otimes Y \to Y\otimes X$ such that for any $X,Y,Z \in \mathcal{C}$ the following diagrams commute.
$$
\xymatrix@C=5pc{
& X\otimes (Y \otimes Z) \ar[r]^{r_{X,Y\otimes Z}} & (Y\otimes Z) \otimes X\ar[dr]^{\alpha_{Y,Z,X}} & \\
(X\otimes Y) \otimes Z \ar[ur]^{\alpha_{X,Y,Z}} \ar[dr]^{r_{X,Y}\otimes \text{Id}_Z} & & & Y\otimes (Z\otimes X) \\
& (Y\otimes X) \otimes Z\ar[r]^{\alpha_{Y,X,Z}} & Y\otimes (X\otimes Z) \ar[ur]^{\text{Id}_Y\otimes r_{X,Z}}
}
$$

$$
\xymatrix@C=5pc{
& (X\otimes Y) \otimes Z \ar[r]^{r_{X\otimes Y, Z}} & (Y\otimes Z) \otimes X\ar[dr]^{\alpha_{Z,X,Y}^{-1}} & \\
X\otimes (Y \otimes Z) \ar[ur]^{\alpha_{X,Y,Z}^{-1}} \ar[dr]^{\text{Id}_X \otimes r_{Y,Z}} & & & (Z\otimes X) \otimes Y \\
& X\otimes (Z\otimes Y)\ar[r]^{\alpha_{X,Z,Y}^{-1}} & (X\otimes Z) \otimes Y \ar[ur]^{r_{X,Z}\otimes \text{Id}_Y}
}
$$

These are called the **hexagon equations**.

When we think of these objects as diagrams they become so nice and motivated. At this level they seem a bit obscure. We often think of these objects as lines, and their junctions as morphisms. The braiding structure allows us to interpret the exchange of the lines. What we will do now is introduce a structure that can let us think of them as ribbons instead of lines.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a tensor category and $\mathbb{1}:\mathcal{C}\to\mathcal{C}$ be the identity functor. Then a natural isomorphism $\theta : \mathbb{1} \to \mathbb{1}$ such that
$$
\theta_{X\otimes Y} = (\theta_X \otimes \theta_Y) \circ r_{Y,X} \circ r_{X,Y},
$$
is called a **twist**. A **ribbon** is a twist such that $(\theta_X)^\ast = \theta_{X^\ast}$. A tensor category with a ribbon is called a **ribbon category**.

There are interesting thing happening in a ribbon category. Namely that it identifies left and right duality.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** The natural transformation with components $u_{X}:X\to X^{\ast \ast}$ give by
$$
u_X \coloneqq (\text{ev}_X \otimes \text{Id}_{X^{\ast\ast}}) \circ (r_{X,X^\ast} \otimes \text{Id}_{X^{\ast \ast}}) \circ (\text{Id}_X \otimes \text{coev}_{X^\ast})
$$
is an isomorphism.

**<u>Corollary:</u>** The left and right dual functors are equal.

This means that we don't need to care about left and right duality in a ribbon category! They are all the same, so from now on we will just use duality. This is particularly nice because it allows us to define traces in a basis independent way.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a tensor category, $X\in \mathcal{C}$ an object and $f:X\to X$ an endomorphism. Then its **left trace** is given by
$$
\tr_{l}(f) = \text{ev}_X \circ (f\otimes \text{Id}_{X^\ast}) \circ \text{coev}_X.
$$
Similarly its **right trace** is given by
$$
\tr_{l}(f) = \text{ev}_{X^\ast} \circ (\text{Id}_{X^\ast} \otimes f) \circ \text{coev}_{X^\ast}.
$$
In addition the **left quantum dimension of** $X$ is defined by $\text{dim}_l(X) \coloneqq \text{tr}_l(\text{Id}_X)$. Similarly the **right quantum dimension of** $X$ is defined by $\text{dim}_r(X) \coloneqq \text{tr}_r(\text{Id}_X)$ 

**<u>Proposition:</u>** In a ribbon category the left and right traces are the same.

From now on we will drop the left right thing when it comes to trace.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** $\text{dim}(X\oplus Y) = \text{dim(X)}+ \text{dim}(Y)$ for any $X,Y \in \mathcal{C}$.

Before we move forward let's have a quick side-note into something that i keep seeing ALL THE TIME and I have no intuition for.

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a ribbon category, $X\in \mathcal{C}$ be such that $X = X^\ast$, and $f:X\to X^\ast$ be an isomorphism. Then we can define the endomorphism $\hat f_{X}:X^\ast \to X^\ast$ by 
$$
\hat f_X \coloneqq (\text{ev}_{X^\ast} \otimes \text{Id}_{X^\ast})\circ (\text{Id}_{X^\ast} \otimes f^{-1}\otimes f)\circ (\text{Id}_{X^\ast} \otimes \text{coev}_{X}).
$$
**<u>Proposition:</u>** $\hat f_X$ is always an automorphism, and if, in addition, $X$ is simple, then it is independent of $f$ and satisfies
$$
\hat f_X = \pm \text{Id}_X.
$$
The sign in front of the identity is known as the **Frobenius-Schur indicator** of $X$, and if it is positive $X$ is **real**, while if it is negative $X$ is called **pseudo-real**, or **symplectic**.  



## Modularity

Using a ribbon category we have already imparted so many niceness conditions. Yet, the data of a Rational CFT give us even more nice stuff! The final nail in the coffin is called *modularity* and it is in some sense a finiteness condition. Here is how to think about it.

We start with an amazing thing, the **linking S-matrix**. This object contains a bunch of data that describe our category. It is not an input per se, but it is descriptive enough to help us classify the Ribbon Categories.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a braided category and let $X,Y \in \mathcal{C}$ be simple objects. Then the **linking s-symbol** $s_{XY}$ is defined by
$$
s_{Y,X} \coloneqq (\text{ev}_{X}\otimes \text{ev}_{Y^\ast}) \circ (\text{Id}_{X^\ast} \otimes r_{Y,X} \otimes \text{Id}_{Y^\ast}) \circ (\text{Id}_{X^\ast} \otimes r_{X,Y} \otimes \text{Id}_{Y^\ast}) \circ (\text{coev}_{X^\ast} \otimes \text{coev}_{Y}) \eqqcolon \text{tr}(r_{YX}\circ r_{XY}) \in \mathbb{C}.
$$
This is weird af, but the diagram is simply a linking diagram of the two lines corresponding to $X,Y$. When there are finitely many primaries the linking S symbols form a matrix known as the **linking s-Matrix**. If the linking s-matrix is nondegenerate then we can normalize it into a unitary matrix  $S$ known as the **S-matrix**.

**<u>Definition:</u>** A semisimple ribbon category with a finite number of simple objects (realistically a finite number of isomorphism classes of simple objects) and a nondegenerate linking s-matrix is a **modular tensor category**.

> **Pedantic Sidenote:** This definition needs some unpacking. The most complicated part is this finite number of isomorphism classes of simple objects. The idea is that a Category can have infinitely many simple objects, however, there can be only finitely many truly distinct ones. That's why we divide by isomorphism. So in principle if we pick a finite dominant family of simple objects $\mathcal{U}$ and take the dual $X^\ast$ of an object $X \in \mathcal{U}$ then there should be an object $\bar X \cong X^\ast$ that is in $\mathcal{U}$. In physics literature we often abuse notation to isomorphism classes as objects so that we don't have to deal with that explicitly.

Yet, apart from this stupid thing, the really interesting part is to talk about the qualifier **modular**. That has to do directly with the non degeneracy of the linking s -matrix. 

**<u>Theorem:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a modular tensor category. Then, the S-matrix as well as the following matrix $T$ defined for every $X,Y \in \mathcal{U}$ by
$$
T_{X,Y} = \alpha_X \delta_{X,Y} \theta_X,
$$
where $\alpha_X \in \mathbb{C}$ is some appropriately chosen normalization, and $\theta_X$ is the $X$ component of the twist of $\mathcal{C}$, define a representation of the modular group.

We will see later what this normalization is and we will prove this theorem in a bit.



## Grothendieck Ring of $\mathcal{C}$

A modular tensor category comes with a free ring! In particular the tensor product over the isomorphism classes of objects in $\mathcal{C}$ defines a commutative and associative ring over $\mathbb{Z}$ known as the **Grothendieck ring** $K_0(\mathcal{C})$ of $\mathcal{C}$. Picking a dominant set $\mathcal{U} \subset \mathcal{C}$ lets us pick a basis for this ring because of semisimplicity.  

**<u>Lemma:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a tensor category and $\mathcal{U} \subset \mathcal{C}$ a dominant family of simple objects. Then the Grothendieck ring $K_0(\mathcal{C})$ structure constants are given for any $X,Y \in \mathcal{U}$ by
$$
X \cdot Y = \sum_{Z \in \mathcal{U}} N_{XY}^Z Z,
$$
where $N_{XY}^Z = \text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(X\otimes Y,Z)$.

***Proof:*** We will take this opportunity to show that $K_0(\mathcal{C})$ is a ring over $\mathbb{Z}$. We take as addition the direct sum of $\mathcal{C}$ as an abelian category, which is already associative and commutative (up to isomorphism). However, what it lacks are inverses. We can either introduce formal inverses in $K_0(\mathcal{C})$ (as in the original Grothendieck construction) or straight up give up and call it a semiring instead. The identity object under tensor product gives us a great unit, while the $0$ object of the monoid gives a great additive unit. Associativity of the tensor product is also true up to isomorphism, the isomorphisms being components of the associator map $\alpha$. Distributivity of multiplication is already in the axioms. 

Now for the structure constants. Pick any two $X,Y \in \mathcal{U}$, then we know that by semisimplicity 
$$
X\otimes Y = \bigoplus_{Z\in \mathcal{U}} N_{XY}^Z Z,
$$
where $N_{XY}^Z \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$ and the notation $3X = X\oplus X\oplus X$ and so on. In this case we can see that
$$
\text{Hom}(X\otimes Y, Z) \cong \bigoplus_{W \in \mathcal{U}} N_{XY}^W\text{Hom}(W,Z).
$$
Since $W,Z$ are simple we have that $\text{Hom}(W,Z) = \mathbb{C}$ iff $W=Z$ otherwise it is $0$. Therefore we can rearrange this to be
$$
s\text{Hom}(X\otimes Y,Z) \cong N_{XY}^Z \mathbb{C} \implies \text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(X\otimes Y,Z) = N_{XY}^Z.
$$

$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$

## Being Careful About Orientation Reversal

There is one more piece of pedantry that is usually swept under the rug in a traditional introduction of modular tensor categories in a CFT. It has to do with the fact that if we pick a dominant family $\mathcal{U}$ of simple objects in a modular tensor category the dual of any object is not necessarily in there. However there must always be an object there isomorphic to the dual in order to preserve dominance. Let's make that more precise.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{U}$ be a dominant family in a modular tensor category $\mathcal{C}$, and consider a simple object $U\in \mathcal{U}$. Then there exists $\bar U \in \mathcal{U}$ such that $\bar U \cong U^\ast$.

***Proof:*** By dominance there exist an isomorphism between a direct sum of members in $\mathcal{U}$ and $U^\ast$. Since $U$ is simple then so is $U^\ast$, which means that it can only be isomorphic to a single simple object. We call that $\bar U$.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation} 
$$
***Note:*** This also means that $\bar U^\ast \cong U$.

**<u>Definition:</u>** Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a modular tensor category and $\mathcal{U}$ a dominant family. Then for any $U \in \mathcal{U}$ we define a **reorientation** isomorphism $\pi_U \in \text{Hom}(U,\bar U^\ast)$ such that if $U \neq \bar U$ then
$$
\text{ev}_{\bar U} \circ (\pi_U \otimes \text{Id}_{\bar U}) = \text{ev}_{U^\ast} \circ(\text{Id}_{U} \otimes \pi_{\bar U}).
$$
**<u>Corollary:</u>** There exists a unique reorientation isomorphism for each simple object in a dominant family.

***Proof:*** Notice that since it is an isomorphism of simple objects, then given one of them $\pi$, any other can be expressed as $c \pi$ for some $c \in \mathbb{C}$. The identity in the definition fixes $c$ in the case of $U \neq \bar U$. In the other case, where $U = \bar U$, we have that $\pi_U = \pi_{\bar U}$  
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation} 
$$

## Bases

While we are trying to find a basis independent way to calculate things, it would be foolish to not use it to find properties that bases should hold. This way we can see what is up to normalization and what it isn't. One way to "pick a basis" would be to pick bases for the trivalent hom spaces. 

More specifically, working in a modular tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ with a fixed dominant family of simple objects $\mathcal{U}$, for any $i,j,k \in \mathcal{U}$ we can pick a basis $\{v_{ijk}^a\}_{a=1}^{\text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(i\otimes j,k)}$ and a dual basis $\{u_{kij}^a\}_{a=1}^{\text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(k,i\otimes j)}$ such that
$$
v_{ijk}^\alpha \circ u_{kij}^\beta = \delta^{\alpha\beta} \text{Id}_k.
$$
One convenient choice we can make is that for any simple $i\in \mathcal{U}$ we have that
$$
v_{1i\bar i} = v_{i1\bar i} = \text{Id}_{i} = u_{i1\bar i} = u_{i\bar i 1},
$$
where $1 \in \mathcal{U}$ is the tensor unit object of $\mathcal{C}$.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** Let $i\in \mathcal{U}$ be a simple dominant object in $\mathcal{C}$. Then there exist $\lambda_i,\hat \lambda_i \in \mathbb{C}$ such that $\lambda_i \hat \lambda_i = (\text{dim\,}i)^{-1}$ and
$$
\begin{align*}
v_{\bar ii1} = \lambda_i \text{ev}_{i^\ast} \circ (\pi_i\otimes 1_{i}) && u_{1\bar ii} = \hat \lambda_i  (\pi_i^{-1}\otimes 1_{i}) \circ \text{coev}_{i^\ast}.
\end{align*}
$$
***Proof:*** Drawing the pictures makes this clear, however, from an algebraic point of view, the existence of these numbers is guaranteed because $\text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(i\otimes i^\ast,1)=\text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(i,i) = 1$. The normalization property is done by imposing the normalization condition
$$
1 = v_{\bar ii1} \circ u_{1\bar ii} = \lambda_i \hat \lambda_i \text{tr\,} \pi_i\circ \pi_i^{-1} = \lambda_i\hat\lambda_i \text{dim\,}i.
$$

$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$

Even though the tensor product is strict in a modular tensor category there are still ambiguities in decomposing said spaces. For example let $i,j,k,l \in \mathcal{U}$ be simple dominant objects. Then we the space $\text{Hom}(i\otimes j\otimes k, l)$ can be decomposed in two different ways.
$$
i\otimes j \otimes k = (i\otimes j) \otimes k \cong \bigoplus_m N_{ij}^m m \otimes k,
$$
but also 
$$
i\otimes j \otimes k = i\otimes (j \otimes k) \cong \bigoplus_m N_{jk}^m i \otimes m.
$$
In terms of Hom spaces, these two must also be isomorphic, and the change of basis maps are called the $F$-Symbols.

In a similar vein, we can express the braiding $r_{ij}$ in the basis we have chosen by defining the $R$-matrix for any $i,j,k \in \mathcal{U}$ as
$$
v_{jik}^{\alpha}\circ r_{ij} \eqqcolon \sum_{\beta} R_{\alpha \beta}^{ijk} v_{ijk}.
$$


# Examples

Let's use the formalism to understand two of the most important and ubiquitous examples of Conformal field theories. The free boson and the $\mathfrak{sl}(2)$ WZW models. We will construct the category and all the relevant data, namely the F matrices and R matrices from the overall chiral algebra.

## Free Boson

Consider the theory of a free field $\phi \in \Gamma(E)$ where $\pi: E \to \mathbb{C}$ is an $S^1$ bundle over $\mathbb{C}$ with a connection $\nabla$ and a radius of the circle given by $R$. The Lagrangian for a free massless boson $\mathcal{L}: \Gamma(E) \to \Omega^2(\mathbb{C})$ is given by
$$
\mathcal{L}(\phi) \coloneqq \int_{\mathbb{C}} d\phi \wedge \ast d\phi,
$$
where $d$ is the induced differential, i.e. $d\phi = d_{\nabla}\phi = \nabla \phi \in \Omega^1(\mathbb{C},E)$ (these technical details don't matter because $S^1$ is a lie group with a well defined addition). There is a natural action of $U(1)$ on $\Gamma(E)$ by taking any $h \in U(1)$ and doing $\phi + h$. Using this we can derive a conserved current $J_T(\phi) = d\phi.$

Notice that since we are in $\mathbb{C}$ we can actually split this current into two parts, the chiral and antichiral parts using Dulbeault operators.
$$
\begin{align*}
J(\phi) \coloneqq \partial \phi && \bar J(\phi) \coloneqq \bar \partial \phi && \implies J_T = J +\bar J.
\end{align*}
$$
In fact we can see that the stress tensor of the theory can be written as $T = J_T \otimes J_T$ and it can also be split into chiral and antichiral parts after making it traceless
$$
\begin{align*}
T' = T - \frac{g }{2} \text{Tr\,}T = J\otimes J + \bar J \otimes \bar J.
\end{align*}
$$
(this is happening because our metric is off diagonal in complex coordinates) This is particularly nice because within $J$ we have all the details we need to define a chiral algebra $\mathcal{B}$. Notice that $J$ can be written as $J(\phi) = J(z)dz$ for some function $J(z) \in \mathbb{C}$. Therefore we can define modes by picking an embedding of $\gamma:S^1\to \mathbb{C}$ sufficiently small and centered at the origin and doing
$$
J_n(\phi) \coloneqq \int_{\gamma} J(\phi) z^{n}.
$$
What is interesting about these objects is that after quantization they obey the following commutation rules which we could show by calculating the canonical symplectic form on $\Gamma(E)$ and then quantizing. 
$$
[J_n,J_m] = n \delta_{n,-m}.
$$

Anyway! The point is that the algebra $\mathcal{B}$ with generators $J_n$ is the affine Lie algebra $\hat{\mathfrak{u}}(1)$.





# Algebra Objects

Algebra objects of Modular Tensor Categories play central role in physics particularly when defining boundary conditions or constructing modular invariants. 

## Definition

Here is an abstract presentation along with a motivation.

**<u>Definition:</u>** An object $A$ of a modular tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ is an **algebra object** if there exist a **multiplication morphism** $m: A\otimes A \to A$ and a **unit** morphism $\eta:1\to A$ such that
$$
\begin{align*}
m\circ(m\otimes \text{Id}_A) = m\circ (\text{Id}_A \otimes m) && m\circ (\eta \otimes \text{Id}_A) = m = m\circ (\text{Id}_A \otimes \eta).
\end{align*}
$$
The first equation is the associativity of the algebra's multiplication, while the second shows the behavior of the unit.

***Note:*** The reason why $A$ is called an **algebra** comes from generalizing the notion of a unital algebra in the context of vector spaces. An algebra is a vector space with a multiplication map and a unit. If we take $\mathcal{C}$ to be the category of vector spaces over a field then the two definitions coincide. 

**<u>Example:</u>** Let $U \in \mathcal{C}$ be an object in a tensor category, then the object $A = U\otimes U^\ast$ together with $m = \text{Id}_U \otimes \text{ev}_U \otimes \text{Id}_{U^\ast}$ and $\eta = \text{coev}_U$ is an algebra object.

The multiplication morphism can be expressed in a basis. In particular if we are in a semisimple tensor category then every algebra can be given as a sum of finitely many simple objects. We often have picked a dominant family of simple objects $\mathcal{U}$ with appropriately chosen trivalent junction vectors which we call a basis. If we canonically pick embeddings i.e. arrows $\alpha: a \to A$ as well as projectors $\bar \alpha : A \to a$ for each (copy of each) simple object $a$ that appears in the expansion of $A$ then we can write that
$$
\bar \gamma \circ m\circ (\alpha \otimes \beta) = \bigoplus_{\delta =  1}^{N_{ab}^c} m_{a\alpha,b\beta}^{c\gamma, \delta} v_{ab}^{c,\delta},
$$
where $v_{ab}^{c,\delta} : a\otimes b \to c$ is a basis element.



## Boundaries in a CFT 

When we have a CFT with chiral algebra $\mathcal{B}$ the Hilbert space of local operators which is obtained by quantizing at a specific spacelike slice is a representation of $\mathcal{B}\otimes \mathcal{B}$. However, we have seen [here](../Quantum_Fields/Boundaries.md) that in the presence of a conformal boundary the Hilbert space we obtain when quantizing on a spacelike slice is a representation of $\mathcal{B}$ only. 

Therefore, we expect this to be an element of the Modular Tensor Category $\mathcal{C}= \text{Rep}(\mathcal{B})$ we have been describing so far. We will show that that element is also an algebra with some extra special properties! Those will end up being the existence of a co-unit, but we will do this shortly. 

Let the Hilbert space be $A = \bigoplus_{i\in I_A} i\in \mathcal{C}$, where $I_A$ is a collection of simple objects in $\mathcal{C}$. Consider two boundary fields $\psi(x),\phi(y)$ corresponding to simple objects $\psi,\phi \in I_A$. Then we can calculate their operator product expansion to be
$$
\psi(x) \phi(y) \sim \sum_{\chi \in I_{\psi\otimes\phi}} C_{\psi,\phi}^{\chi}(x-y)^{\Delta_\chi - \Delta_{\psi} - \Delta_{\phi}}\chi(y),
$$
where the equivalence $\sim$ is up to terms involving descendants of boundary fields associated to simple objects. Notice that since $I_A$ is a family of simple objects it might involve repetitions, so multiplicity indices are implicit. To get rid of the equivalence relation and write down the full OPE we need to define a basis for the space of couplings. We will end up constructing vertex operators. 

Let's consider the following operators $V_{ab}^c(z) \in \text{Hom}(a\otimes b,c)$, we can interpret each as a map $V_{ab}^c(z):a \to \text{Hom}(b,c)$, where $z$ is some point in $\mathbb{C}$, as fields they are given by $V_{ab}^c:a\to \text{Hom}(b,c) [[z,z^{-1}]]z^{\Delta_c - \Delta_a - \Delta_b}$, where $\text{Hom}(b,c) [[z,z^{-1}]]$ is notation for the set of formal Laurent series with coefficients in $\text{Hom}(b,c)$. For each $a,b,c \in \mathcal{U}$ we can pick $N_{ab}^c$ vertex operators. What we can also pick is a basis of each $a \in I_A$ of eigenstates of $L_0$, which we will call $B_a$ and only impose that $v_a \in B_a$ where $v_a$ is the highest weight vector of $a$. One last thing is that for each of the basis vectors $v \in B$, by operator state correspondence there is an operator $\Psi_v$ that we will make use of. Now we are finally ready to fully write the OPE like so
$$
\psi(x)\phi(y) = \sum_{\chi \in I_{\psi\otimes \phi}} C_{\psi\phi}^\chi(x-y)^{- \Delta_{\psi} - \Delta_{\phi}} \sum_{v \in B_{\chi}} \langle v, V_{\psi \phi}^{\chi}(z=1,v_\psi) v_{\phi} \rangle (x-y)^{\Delta(v)} \Psi_{v}(y).
$$
This isn't obvious, but there is a way in which the choice $V_{ab}^c(z)$ is a natural object. We can consider a sphere with three punctures at $0,\infty,$ and $z \in \mathbb{C}$, we can call that manifold $M_z$. Our CFT $\mathcal{Z}$ assigns a state $V(z) \coloneqq \mathcal{Z}(M_z) \in A\otimes A\otimes A^\ast$ (that is because of the orientations of the three punctures) which can be further decomposed into components $V_{ab}^c(z):a\otimes b\otimes c^\ast$ where $a,b,c \in I_A$. These are the vertex operators. The choice is "natural" because we didn't make any insertions in the CFT we just found the state that connects the three Hilbert spaces. 

Using this expression on a 4-point function, we can get a constraint on the numbers $C$ in terms of the $F$ symbols of $\mathcal{C}$. These conditions are identical to the conditions for the components of the multiplication map in the basis defined by $V$. This is awesome! So we can say that $A$ is an algebra with multiplication map given by the OPE coefficients and unit the map corresponding to the identity field in the theory. Namely $A$ must contain $1$ as one of its terms, therefore the vacuum state $v \in 1$ defines an intertwiner $\eta:1 \to A$ through mapping it onto itself in $A$, so in some sense the unit is the canonical injection $\iota_1 : 1 \to A$. 

Yet there is more! 

**<u>Proposition:</u>**  Let $\psi(x)$ be a boundary field, then if $\Delta(\psi) \neq 0$
$$
\langle \psi(x) \rangle = 0.
$$
The cool thing though is that it might be possible for $\langle \psi(x) \rangle \neq 0$ when the conformal weight of $\psi$ vanishes! We define an intertwiner $\epsilon: A\to 1$ such that $\epsilon(v) = \langle \Psi_v(1) \rangle$. We can do some CFT to show that this map $\epsilon$ looks like a unit for an algebra but in acting in the opposite direction. We use this as motivation to nail down some nicer structures we can add to the Algebras involved in a CFT. 



## Frobenius Algebra Objects

We start our exploration of the additional algebra objects by understanding the role of the $\epsilon : A \to 1$ arrow we stumbled upon before. 

**<u>Definition:</u>** An object $A$ in a tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ is a **coalgebra** with if there is a **coproduct** $\Delta: A \to A\otimes A$ and a **counit** $\epsilon: A \to 1$ such that
$$
\begin{align*}
(\Delta \otimes \text{Id}_A) \circ \Delta = (\text{Id}_A \otimes \Delta) \circ \Delta && (\epsilon \otimes \text{Id}_A) \circ \Delta = \text{Id}_A = (\text{Id}_A \otimes \epsilon) \circ \Delta.
\end{align*} 
$$
Notice that a coalgebra is simply the categorical dual of an algebra. An interesting object for us is an algebra that is also a coalgebra!

**<u>Definition:</u>** An object $A$ in a tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ is a is a **Frobenius algebra** if it is both an algebra and a coalgebra such that
$$
(\text{Id}_A \otimes \Delta) \circ (m \otimes \text{Id}_A) = \Delta \circ m = (\Delta \otimes \text{Id}_A) \circ (\text{Id}_A \otimes m).
$$
$A$ is a **special algebra** if it is both an algebra and a coalgebra such that there exist number $\beta_1, \beta_A \in \mathbb{C}$ where 
$$
\begin{align*}
\epsilon \circ \eta = \beta_{1} \text{Id}_1  && \Delta \circ m = \beta_A \text{Id}_A.
\end{align*} 
$$
If the $\mathcal{C}$ is also sovereign, then an algebra object $A$ is **symmetric** if there exists an arrow $\epsilon: A\to 1$ such that 
$$
[(\epsilon \circ m)\otimes \text{Id}_{A^\ast}] \circ (\text{Id}_A \otimes \text{coev}_{A}) = [ \text{Id}_{A} \otimes(\epsilon \circ m)] \circ (\text{coev}_{A^\ast} \otimes \text{Id}_A ).
$$
If $\mathcal{C}$ is braided and $A$ is an algebra object, then it is also **commutative** if
$$
m \circ r_{A,A} = m.
$$
Finally, an algebra object $A$ is **haploid** if $\text{dim\,}\text{Hom}(1,A) = 1$. 

Phew! That was a lot of definitions. However, it will be possible to show that the map $\epsilon(v) = \langle \Psi_v(1) \rangle$ is indeed a counit for $A$ turning $A$ into a special symmetric Frobenius algebra. Since we gave a bunch of definitions here, it is important to hint on something that will become super useful later on. In physics we care about representations of these algebras. For example we care about the category of modules of these algebras. It could happen that two different algebra objects have the same representation theory. Then we call the two algebras **Morita equivalent** and for the purposes of physics that is enough of a distinction. Turns out that niceness properties like haplodity or commutativity are not invariant under Morita equivalence. Therefore it might be possible in a lot of cases, to identify an ugly algebra to work with, but have a nicer one inside its Morita class. We will play this game a lot, and talk about Morita equivalence more precisely, but the idea is here. 

Until then, here is a nice theorem.

**<u>Theorem:</u>** The structure of a symmetric special Frobenius algebra is unique up to normalization, i.e. up to a number $\xi \in \mathbb{C}^\times$, and every algebra coming from a boundary condition that preserves a chiral algebra $\mathcal{B}$ can be endowed with a special Frobenius algebra structure provided that the CFT is rational, unitary, and has a unique vacuum in the bulk. 

One more interesting thing to define is the equivalent of the Junction vector space in topological defects. Every algebra object $A$ in a tensor category $\mathcal{C}$ defines an algebra over $\mathbb{C}$ using by
$$
A_{\text{top}} \coloneqq \text{Hom}(1,A). 
$$
The vector space can be thought of as all the topological boundary operators, i.e. the ones with vanishing conformal weight that can be moved around without changing calculations. The induced multiplication maps and units are given by
$$
\begin{align*}
m_{\text{top}}(\alpha \otimes \beta) \coloneqq m \circ (\alpha \otimes \beta) && \eta_{\text{top}}(1) = \eta.
\end{align*}
$$


## Constructing More Algebras 

Let's examine ways to build algebras from other algebras like tensor products 





