# Conformal Defects in Tricritical Ising

These are haphazard notes about the Tricritical Ising CFT that I will put together in a better format soon. 

[toc]



# WZW Models with $\mathfrak{su}(2)_k$

To avoid crying with representation theory of affine Lie algebras let's take a moment to write everything in terms of $\mathfrak{su}(2)$ representations.



## Blazing through WZW Models

These are CFTs with (surprisingly) a Lagrangian description. Consider a map $\gamma : \Sigma \to \text{SU}(2)$ from some Riemann surface $\Sigma$ that is the boundary of some manifold $B$. The $k$ level WZW action is given by
$$
S(\gamma)= - \frac{k}{8\pi} \int_{\Sigma}\gamma^{-1}d\gamma \wedge \ast \gamma^{-1}d\gamma -\frac{k}{24 \pi}  \int_B \gamma^\ast c,
$$
where the hodge dual is taken with respect to $K$, the Killing form in $\mathfrak{su}(2)$, and $c$ is the Harmonic 3-form on $SU(2)$. Honestly the Lagrangian is fun, but here are some results without proof.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** Let $\Omega : \Sigma \to SU(2)$ be holomorphic or antiholomorphic. Then
$$
S(\Omega \gamma \bar \Omega^{-1}) = S(\gamma).
$$
***Proof:*** AHAHAHAHA sure. if you apply the Polyakov identity 10 thousand times you'll get it. I love copying theorems from textbooks. 
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
This has the interesting corollary using Noether's theorem.

**<u>Corollary:</u>** The following are associated conserved currents under the action of the holomorphic and antiholomorphic parts respectively 
$$
\begin{align*}
J(z) = -\frac{k}{2} (\partial \gamma) \gamma^{-1}&& \bar J(\bar z) = -\frac{k}{2} \gamma^{-1}\bar \partial \gamma.
\end{align*}
$$
Now consider the fields given by
$$
\begin{align*}
J^a = K(T^a,J) && \bar J^a = K(T^a,\bar J),
\end{align*} 
$$
where $T^a \in \mathfrak{su}(2)$ is some generator of the Lie algebra, and $K$ is the Killing form again. These can be expanded in modes 
$$
J^a(z) = \sum_{n\in \mathbb{Z}} J_n^a z^{-n-1},
$$
to yield a representation of the **affine lie algebra** of $\mathfrak{su}(2)$ at level $k$. This is the algebra such that
$$
[J_n^a,J_m^b] = f^{ab}_c J^c_{m+n} + kn \delta^{ab} \delta_{n,-m},
$$
where $f^{ab}_c$ are the structure constants of $\mathfrak{su}(2)$. So overall this is a conformal field theory with additional stuff in its chiral algebra. The affine lie algebra at level $k$ is often denoted by $\mathfrak{su}(2)_k$.



## Representation Theory of $\mathfrak{su}(2)_k$

The $\mathfrak{su}(2)$ algebra is generated by $J_{\pm},J_0 \in \mathfrak{su}(2)$ such that
$$
\begin{align*}
[J_0,J_{\pm}] = \pm J_{\pm} && [J_+,J_-] = 2J_0.
\end{align*}
$$
What we already know is that the irreducible representations can be labeled by $j \in \frac{1}{2} \mathbb{N}$ and have dimension $2j + 1$ where the highest weight state is annihilated by $J_+$ and other states are obtained by applying $J_-$.



As we already know however the only representations that appear in a CFT are highest weight representations. So we expect the chiral algebra to be a direct sum of irreducible highest weight representations of $\mathfrak{su}(2)_k$.

**<u>Proposition:</u>** The highest weight unitary representations of $\mathfrak{su}(2)_k$ have conformal weight classified by
$$
h_j = \frac{j(j+1)}{k+2},
$$
where $j \in \frac{1}{2} \mathbb{Z}_{k+1}$. Additionally, (and quite conveniently) the fusion rules can be obtained by (almost) the Clebsch Gordan theorem, i.e. 
$$
V_j \otimes V_{l} = V_{\abs{j-l}} \oplus \cdots \oplus V_{\min\{j+l,k-j-l\}},
$$
where $V_j$ are Verma modules. 

Notice that here the central charge is fixed by $k$ and it is
$$
c = \frac{3k}{k+2} - 1.
$$

The other result is that each representation can be further decomposed into $U(1)$ representations like so
$$
V_l = \bigoplus_{m=-l}^l V_{l,m},
$$
where these are highest weight representations with conformal weight $h = \frac{m^2}{k}$.



## The Coset Model

The quotient we are taking in this theory is $\frac{\mathfrak{su}(2)_8}{\mathfrak{u}(1)}$ which basically implies that we have the following identifications for the irreducible representations.
$$
V_{l,m} \sim V_{\frac{k}{2} - l, m+\frac{k}{2}} \sim V_{\frac{k}{2} - l, m-\frac{k}{2}},
$$
if they exist. So with this identification we have the final decomposition for the coset model in primaries. So let's find the characters. Actually I don't need to do that, here they are.
$$
\chi_{lm}= \eta(q)c^l_m(q),
$$

where $\eta(q)$ is given by the ratio of the generalized theta function
$$
\Theta_m(q) = \sum_{n\in \mathbb{Z}}q^{8(n+m/8)^2},
$$
to the the $\mathfrak{u}(1)_8$ characters $K_m$ at level $8$ as
$$
\eta(q) = \frac{\Theta_m(q)}{K_m(q)} = q^{\frac{1}{24}} \phi(q) = q^{\frac{1}{24}} \prod_{n=1}^\infty (1-q^n).
$$
One can show that $\eta$ is the Dedekind function. Also $c^l_m$ is the normalized string function given by
$$
c^l_m(q)= q^{h_l - h_m -\frac{1}{10}} \sigma_m^l(q),
$$
where 
$$
\sigma_m^l(q) = \sum_{n=0}^\infty \text{mult}_l(m-n\delta)q^n,
$$
is the actual string function, i.e. the generating function of the multiplicities along Weyl orbits. 




# Gauging Tricritical Ising

We want to study the folded Tricritical Ising $\text{TIsing}$ model which is the cft we denote $\text{TIsing}^2$. This CFT has chiral algebra $\mathcal{A} = \text{Vir}^2$ and it is a rational CFT with central charge $c = 7/5$. 

## Identifying a $\mathbb{Z}_2$ 

We want to perform discrete Gauging by $\mathbb{Z}_2$. We can write the operator algebra of $\text{TIsing}^2$ in $\text{Vir}^2 \times \overline{\text{Vir}^2}$ irreducible representations as
$$
\mathbb{H} = \bigoplus_{i,j=1}^6 (W_i\otimes \overline W_j) \otimes (\overline W_i\otimes W_j),
$$
where $W_i$ are the 6 irreducible Virasoro Modules that appear in the Tricritical Ising minimal model. We can show, but I won't, that each irreducible representation in $\text{TIsing}^2$ is given by 
$$
W_{ij} = W_i \otimes \overline W_{j},
$$
and there are $36$ of them. 

**<u>Proposition:</u>** Consider the $\text{Vir}$-equivariant linear map
$$
\begin{align}
\sigma : \mathbb{H} &\to \mathbb{H}\\
\sigma(v_{ij}\otimes \bar v_{ij}) &\mapsto v_{ji} \otimes \bar v_{ji},
\end{align}
$$
where $v_{ij} \in W_{ij}$ is the highest weight vector in $W_{ij}$. Then $\sigma$ together with $\mathbb{1}_{\mathbb{H}}$ forms a representation of $\mathbb{Z}_2$ on $\text{Aut\,}\mathbb{H}$. 

***Proof:***  $\sigma^2 = \mathbb{1}_{\mathbb{H}}$. Then the representation is mapping the corresponding elements of $\mathbb{Z}_2$. 
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
**<u>Corollary:</u>** $\sigma$ is a global symmetry in $\text{TIsing}^2$.

***Proof:*** Notice that the Laurent modes of this theory are given by $L_n = L_n^1 + L_n^2$. Additionally $\sigma$ is permutation transformation so it is hermitian. Therefore we have that
$$
\begin{align*}
\sigma^\dagger L_n \sigma 
&= \sigma (L_n^1 + L_n^2) \sigma\\
&= \sigma^2 (L_n^1 + L_n^2)\\
&= L_n,
\end{align*}
$$
where in the next to last step we have used equivariance of $\sigma$, i.e. $[\sigma,L_n] = 0 $ and $\sigma^2 = 1$.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
So we have a tasty $\mathbb{Z}_2$ global symmetry to gauge under! Wohooo!



## Gauging

I mean, the exact map between the ungauged and gauged theories is hard to write down. However, we don't *really* need it. We can calculate the modular partition function of the gauged theory like so.

**<u>Lemma:</u>** Let $W_{ij}$ denote an irreducible representation of $\text{Vir}^2$ in the $\text{TIsing}^2$ CFT, and $\chi_i(q)$ be the character associated with an irreducible representation $V_i$ of $\text{Vir}$ in the $\text{TIsing}$ CFT. Then 
$$
\text{Tr}_{W_{ij}}\ \sigma q^H = \delta_{ij} \chi_i(q^2),
$$
where $H = L_0 - \frac{c}{24}$, $q \in \mathbb{C}$.

***Proof:*** Notice that $\{W_n,\sigma\} = 0$ where $W_n = L_n^1 - L_n^2$ are the remaining generators of $\text{Vir}^2$. Then We have that there is an orthonormal basis $B_{ij}$ of $W_{ij}$ where every element $v \in B_{ij}$ can be given as
$$
v = L_v W_v v_{ij},
$$
where $v_{ij} \in W_{ij}$ is the highest weight vector of $W_{ij}$ and $L_v,W_v$ are strings comprised of multiplying $L_n,W_n$ operators. Assume that there are $m_v \in \mathbb{Z}_+$ $W_n$ operators in the string $W$. Then we have that
$$
\sigma v = (-1)^{m_v} L_vW_vv_{ji}.
$$
Putting these together we have that
$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Tr}_{W_{ij}} \sigma q^H 
&= \sum_{v \in B_{ij}} \langle v,\sigma q^H v \rangle\\
&= \sum_{v \in B_{ij}} \langle v,\sigma W_v q^HL_v v_{ij} \rangle\\
&= \sum_{v \in B_{ij}} (-1)^{m_v}q^{h_i + h_j -\frac{c}{24} + n_v} \langle L_{v}^\dagger W_{v}^\dagger v,v_{ji} \rangle,
\end{align*}
$$
where in the last step $n_v$ is the Virasoro level of $v \in B_{ij}$ and $h_i,h_j$ are the conformal weights of Tricritical Ising. Most interestingly notice that the vectors $L_v^\dagger W_v^\dagger W_v L_v v_{ij} \propto v_{ij}$ and $v_{ji}$ are orthogonal unless $i=j$. Using these two facts we can rewrite this as
$$
\text{Tr}_{W_{ij}} \sigma q^H = \delta_{ij}\sum_{v \in B_{ii}}(-1)^{m_{v}} q^{2h_i -\frac{c}{24} +n_v} = \delta_{ij} \Tr_{W_{ii}} \sigma q^H.
$$
We are almost there, but we now need to calculate this trace over $W_{ii}=W_{i} \otimes \overline{W}_i$. To do this, we know that 
$$
W_i = \bigoplus_{n=0}^\infty W_i^n,
$$
where $W_i^n$ is the eigenspace of $L_0^1$ with eigenvalue $h_i + n$. Therefore we can perform a similar decomposition into such eigenspaces of $L_0 = L_0^1 + L_0^2$ in $W_{ii}$ by noticing that for $v \in W_i^n$ and $w \in \overline{W}_i^m$ then $L_0 v\otimes w = (2h_i + n +m)v\otimes w$. This leads to the following decomposition
$$
W_{ii} = \bigoplus_{n=0}^\infty \left( \bigoplus_{m=0}^n W_i^m \otimes \overline{W}^{n-m}_i \right).
$$
With this we can write the trace as
$$
\text{Tr}_{W_{ii}} \sigma q^H = \sum_{n=0}^\infty q^{2h_i +n - \frac{c}{24}}\sum_{m=0}^n\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{n-m}}\sigma .
$$
Calculating $\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{n-m}}\sigma$ might seem daunting but there is a trick. First notice that if $n-m = m$ and $B_i^m = \{v_i^j\}_{j=0}^{\dim W_i^m}$ is a basis for $W_i^m$, then 
$$
\begin{align*}
\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{m}}\sigma 
&= \sum_{jk = 0}^{\dim W_i^m} \langle v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k,\sigma v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k \rangle\\
&= \sum_{jk = 0}^{\dim W_i^m} \langle v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k, v_i^k\otimes \bar v_i^j \rangle\\
&= \sum_{jk = 0}^{\dim W_i^m} \delta_{kj}\\
&= \dim W_i^m.
\end{align*}
$$
But if $n -m \neq m$ we have that
$$
\begin{align*}
\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{n-m}}\sigma 
&= \sum_{j = 0}^{\dim W_i^m}\sum_{k = 0}^{\dim W_i^{n-m}} \langle v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k,\sigma v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k \rangle\\
&= \sum_{jk = 0}^{\dim W_i^m} \langle v_i^j\otimes \bar v_i^k, v_i^k\otimes \bar v_i^j \rangle\\
&= \sum_{jk = 0}^{\dim W_i^m} 0\\
&= 0.
\end{align*}
$$
Therefore we conclude that
$$
\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{n-m}} = \delta_{n-m,m} \dim W_i^m.
$$
Doing some rewriting of our original sum ($n\mapsto 2n$) we obtain
$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Tr}_{W_{ii}} \sigma q^H 
&= \sum_{n=0}^\infty q^{2h_i +2n - \frac{c}{24}}\sum_{m=0}^{2n}\Tr_{W_i^m\otimes \overline{W}_i^{2n-m}}\sigma\\
&= \sum_{n=0}^\infty q^{2h_i +2n - \frac{c}{24}}\sum_{m=0}^{2n}\delta_{2n-m,m} \text{dim} W_i^m\\
&= \sum_{n=0}^\infty q^{2h_i +2n - \frac{c}{24}} \text{dim} W_i^n\\
&= \chi_i(q^2),
\end{align*}
$$
where in the last step we notice that $c$ for $\text{TIsing}^2$ is twice the central charge for $\text{TIsing}$.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
**<u>Corollary:</u>** The partition function with one spacelike insertion of a $\sigma$ TDL is given by
$$
Z_{\sigma}(q) = \text{Tr\,} \sigma q^{H} = \sum_{i=1}^6 \abs{\chi_{i}(q^2)}^2 = Z(q^2),
$$
where $Z(q)$ is the partition function of the untwisted Tricritical Ising CFT.

***Proof:*** This is an application of the previous lemma when taking the trace with respect to the irreducible representations of $\mathcal{H}$ and the level basis of each.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
This is pretty nifty because we didn't even have to use modular invariance to figure this out! We can now simply use $S$ and $T$ transformations as long as modular covariance of $Z_\sigma$ to obtain the full partition function of the gauged theory. Therefore we can get the gauged partition function by modular transformations of $Z_\sigma$.

**<u>Lemma:</u>** Under the exchange $\mathbb{Z}_2$ symmetry we have introduced the gauged partition function is given by 
$$
Z_{\mathbb{Z}_2}(q) = \frac{1}{2} \left[ Z(q)^2 + Z(q^2) + Z(\sqrt{q}) + Z(-\sqrt{q}) \right],
$$
where $Z(q)$ is the partition function of the Tricritical Ising Model. 

***Proof:*** We can see this through applying modular transformations in $Z_\sigma(q) = Z(q^2)$.
$$
\begin{equation}\tag*{$\Box$}\end{equation}
$$
 



# A map between Representations

We need to work out the map between the characters of the gauged and ungauged theory. We can do this by studying the characters.

## Decomposition of Gauged Theory

What we want to do is to take the representations $\tilde W_i$ of the Gauged Algebra $\tilde{\mathcal{A}}$ and write them as direct sums of representations $W_{i}$ of the ungaged chiral algebra $\mathcal{A}$. Namely we should find how
$$
\tilde W_i = \bigoplus_{j\in I_i} A_{i}^{j} W_{j},
$$
where $A_{i}^j$ are a bunch of integers. Therefore we can see that the characters $\tilde \chi_i$ of the gauged theory can be written in terms of the characters $\chi_i$ of the ungaged theory like so
$$
\tilde \chi_i = A_{i}^{j} \chi_j.  
$$
Which is fantastic! In other words we can cheat and figure out the map $A$ between the characters by inspecting the expansions of $\chi_i$ and $\tilde \chi_i$.



## Pullback of Ishibashi states

With this map we then pullback the Ishibashi states from the gauged theory and then recheck the Cardy states to see which ones preserve modular covariance of the annulus partition function of the ungauged theory. 

 # What are we looking for?

The latest forecast says that we should be looking for combinations of Ishibashi states in the coset cft such that they remain invariant under $\text{Ising}\boxtimes \text{Fib}$. 

Since the coset cft is rational there are as many independent Ishibashi states as there are primaries. We can then find the action of Ising in the span of Ishibashi states. The conformal boundary conditions that are invariant under Ising, would be the Cardy states that fall in the intersection of the eigenspaces with eigenvalue 1 of all the Ising operators. 

Gauging relates the two theories. So in some sense there is a map between the ungauged theory and the gauged one that would map the characters of the ungauged theory to the ones of the gauged theory. Then the boundary states that also form a nim rep of the ungauged theory are what we are looking for.   

## What do I need to figure out?

1. When we say that a defect is conformal in what sense does this mean that it is invariant under the symmetry fusion ring? - It means that each boundary satisfies the conformal boundary condition and a collection of them defines a nim rep of the fusion ring of the symmetry.









